Hi, it’s Sarah Mitchell. Welcome back. In our last lesson, we took a deep dive into metabolic rigidity. We looked at how the body gets stuck in a state of cellular gridlock. But today, we are going to add a layer of complexity that every advanced practitioner must master. We’re talking about the chemical layer. We’re talking about the medications your clients are already taking.

As you advance in your career as a functional medicine coach, you’re going to meet what I call the complex client. This is the individual who walks into your office with a folder an inch thick. They have a ten-page health history. And when you ask about their medications, they pull out a literal cabinet full of prescriptions. It can feel overwhelming at first. You might wonder where you even fit into a picture that is already so crowded with pharmaceutical interventions.

But here is the truth. This is exactly where you provide the most value. In this lesson, we’re moving beyond the basic supplement protocols. We’re stepping into the sophisticated world of pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics. Now, don’t let those big words intimidate you. Pharmacokinetics is simply what the body does to the drug—how it moves it, breaks it down, and gets rid of it. Pharmacodynamics is what the drug does to the body.

When a client’s mitochondria are already struggling, we have to be incredibly careful. We have to ensure that our target interventions—the herbs and nutrients we want to use to help them heal—don’t collide with the drugs they are already taking. Our goal today is to help you identify where these drugs create functional gaps. We’re going to look at how to safely layer the R.O.O.T.S. Method™ without ever compromising a client’s safety.

By the end of this session, you’ll be able to analyze the clinical impact of polypharmacy. That’s the use of five or more medications at once. You’ll be able to identify the most common drug-induced nutrient depletions. We’ll look specifically at statins, PPIs, and metformin. We’re also going to evaluate the Cytochrome P450 pathways. This is the liver's primary detoxification system, and it’s where most herb-drug interactions happen. Most importantly, I’m going to show you how to develop a sequenced protocol for these multi-medicated clients and how to talk to their doctors with confidence and professional ethics.

Let’s start with the reality of the complex client. In conventional medicine, there is a phenomenon called the prescribing cascade. It’s something you need to be able to spot immediately. It happens when a side effect of one drug is misinterpreted as a brand-new medical condition. So, the doctor writes a second prescription to treat the side effect of the first one. Then, that second drug causes its own side effect, leading to a third prescription.

By the time a client reaches a functional medicine practitioner like you, they are often suffering. But they aren’t just suffering from their original disease. They are suffering from the biochemical friction of polypharmacy. Polypharmacy is officially defined as taking five or more medications concurrently. And this isn’t a rare occurrence. Research from 2021 shows that about 40% of older adults in the United States meet this criteria.

When you see a client on five or more drugs, I want you to immediately think about the Biotransformation node on the Functional Medicine Matrix. Their liver and kidneys are already under massive stress just trying to process these synthetic chemicals. Before you even think about adding a single botanical or high-dose vitamin, you have to account for that stress.

I want you to think of yourself as a biochemical detective. Your role isn’t to play doctor or to tell them to stop their meds. Your role is to find the functional gaps. These are the holes in their nutrition and cellular function that the drugs have created. Practitioners who can do this effectively are in high demand. This is why expert coaches can command fees of $450 to $600 for an initial consultation. This level of expertise is rare, and for the client, it is life-changing.

Let’s talk about those functional gaps. We call them Drug-Induced Nutrient Depletion, or DIND for short. This is the low-hanging fruit of functional medicine. If we want to reach the root cause of a client’s health issues, we have to give the body the tools it needs for repair. If their medications are stripping those tools away, the body can’t heal, no matter how good your diet plan is.

Identifying these depletions is a quick win. It’s part of our Optimize phase, and it can bring back a client’s vitality faster than almost anything else. Let’s look at some of the biggest culprits.

First, let’s talk about Metformin. It’s one of the most common drugs for Type 2 diabetes and PCOS. But Metformin is a major thief of Vitamin B12 and folate. It actually interferes with how the ileum—the end of the small intestine—absorbs B12. A major study in 2023 found that long-term Metformin use was linked to a 65% increased risk of B12 deficiency. But here’s the kicker: less than 20% of those patients were ever screened for it. When B12 drops, the client gets neuropathy. They get pins and needles in their feet. They get crushing fatigue and brain fog. Often, the doctor thinks the diabetes is getting worse, when in reality, the drug is just depleting a vital nutrient.

Then we have Statins, like Atorvastatin or Simvastatin. These are used for cholesterol. But the way they work is by blocking an enzyme called HMG-CoA reductase. The problem is, that same pathway is what the body uses to make CoQ10. CoQ10 is the spark plug of the mitochondria. When you block it, the client gets myalgia—that’s deep muscle pain. They feel like they’ve run a marathon when they’ve only walked to the mailbox. They also lose Vitamin D. If you see a client on a statin who is exhausted and has aching muscles, you should immediately suspect a CoQ10 depletion.

Next are the PPIs—proton pump inhibitors like Omeprazole or Nexium. These are used for reflux and heartburn. But they work by shutting down stomach acid. We need that acid to ionize minerals so we can absorb them. Without it, the body can’t take in magnesium, B12, iron, or calcium. This leads to osteoporosis, anxiety, and a condition called hypochlorhydria, which actually makes digestion worse in the long run.

Finally, consider loop diuretics like Lasix, used for blood pressure. These flush out fluid, but they also flush out magnesium, potassium, zinc, and B vitamins. This can lead to heart arrhythmias and even impaired glucose tolerance.

As a certified practitioner, your job is to look at the med list and say, "Okay, if they are on these three drugs, they are likely low in these four nutrients." You address those depletions first. That is how you build a solid foundation for the Target phase.

Now, let's get into the more technical side: the Cytochrome P450 system. This is a family of enzymes in the liver. They are the primary workers responsible for metabolizing about 75 to 80% of all pharmaceutical drugs. Think of them like a busy highway. When we introduce concentrated nutraceuticals—things like high-dose berberine or curcumin—we are adding more cars to that highway.

We have two main types of interactions here: inhibitors and inducers.

If a botanical is an inhibitor, it slows down the enzyme. It’s like a traffic jam. Because the enzyme is moving slowly, the drug stays in the client’s system much longer than it should. This can cause the drug to reach toxic levels in the blood. You’ve probably seen the warning on many prescription bottles to avoid grapefruit juice. That’s because grapefruit is a potent inhibitor of the CYP3A4 enzyme. If you drink it while taking a statin, the drug levels can skyrocket, leading to dangerous side effects.

On the other hand, we have inducers. An inducer speeds up the enzyme. It’s like the cars are suddenly going 120 miles per hour. The drug is cleared out of the system way too fast. It doesn't stay in the body long enough to do its job, so it becomes ineffective. A classic example is St. John’s Wort. It’s a powerful inducer. If a woman is on birth control and takes St. John’s Wort, the liver clears the birth control so quickly that it might not prevent pregnancy. It can also cause organ rejection in people taking transplant medications.

This is why we have to be so careful in the Target phase. There are a few high-risk functional pairings I want you to memorize.

First, Berberine. It is an amazing tool for blood sugar and gut health, but it is a potent inhibitor of CYP3A4. It can significantly increase the levels of certain blood pressure medications and immunosuppressants. If your client is on those meds, you have to be extremely cautious with berberine.

Next is Curcumin. We love it for inflammation. But in high doses, it can inhibit platelet aggregation. That means it thins the blood. If your client is already on an anticoagulant like Warfarin or even just daily Aspirin, adding high-dose curcumin could increase their risk of bleeding.

Then there’s Quercetin. It’s great for allergies and mast cell issues, but it can interfere with the transport of certain antibiotics, like fluoroquinolones. It makes the antibiotic less effective.

I always tell my students: never guess. Use a professional drug-nutrient interaction checker. I use the Natural Medicines Database or Examine.com. Before you finalize any protocol for a medicated client, run every single supplement through a checker. And here’s a pro tip: document that you’ve done this. When you can show a client or their doctor that you’ve checked for CYP450 interactions, it builds immense trust. It shows that you aren't just a "supplement pusher"—you are a clinical professional.

Let me tell you a story about a client named Linda. This case really illustrates how all of this comes together. Linda was 54, a former school administrator. She was struggling. She had Hashimoto’s, Type 2 diabetes, hypertension, and chronic reflux. She was on five different medications: Levothyroxine for her thyroid, Metformin for her blood sugar, Lisinopril for blood pressure, Omeprazole for her reflux, and Atorvastatin for her cholesterol.

When Linda came to see me, she was miserable. She had extreme fatigue, her brain felt like it was in a fog, her muscles ached all the time, and she had this constant "pins and needles" sensation in her feet. Her doctors told her it was just her diabetes and age.

But when we looked at her through the functional lens, we saw something different. We didn't try to "fix" her thyroid or her diabetes right away. Instead, we looked for the gaps. We ran some tests and found her B12 was at 210. In conventional medicine, that’s "normal," but in functional medicine, we know that’s way too low for optimal brain function. We also checked her CoQ10 levels, and they were bottomed out at 0.4.

Remember her meds? Metformin was likely draining her B12. The statin was draining her CoQ10. The PPI was making it impossible for her to absorb either from her food.

So, instead of a complex protocol, we started with the Optimize phase. We addressed the depletions. We added a high-quality, sublingual Methyl-B12 and 200 milligrams of Ubiquinol, which is the active form of CoQ10. That was it. We didn't touch her other meds. We didn't add twenty herbs.

Within three weeks, Linda was a different person. Her muscle aches vanished. That "pins and needles" feeling—which was actually Metformin-induced neuropathy—completely resolved. Her brain fog lifted. Linda was so inspired by this that she actually went on to become a health coach herself. She realized that her five different specialists were all looking at one organ at a time, but nobody was looking at how the medications were interacting with her basic biochemistry.

That is the power of what you are learning.

Now, when you do move into the Target phase with a complex client, you have to change your strategy. In the R.O.O.T.S. Method™, we use something called the "One-at-a-Time" Rule.

For a healthy client, you might introduce a few things at once. But for a polypharmacy client, you must be incremental. If you change five variables at the same time and the client starts feeling dizzy or nauseous, you have no idea why. Is it a "Herx" reaction from a gut protocol? Is it a drug interaction? Or is it just a new side effect of one of their medications?

The rule is simple: introduce only ONE new target nutraceutical every five to seven days. This gives the liver’s biotransformation pathways time to adjust. It also gives you and the client total clarity on how they are tolerating each intervention. If they feel great for four days and then start feeling off on day six, you know exactly which supplement caused the issue. This slow approach prevents setbacks and keeps the client feeling safe.

Finally, let’s talk about the most important part of your job: collaborative care and ethics. This is where many coaches get into trouble, and I want to make sure you stay on the right side of the line.

As a functional medicine practitioner, you must stay within your scope of practice. We are not doctors. We do not diagnose. And we never, ever tell a client to stop taking a prescription medication. That is a hard line.

However, what we do is empower the client with data. We give them the information they need to have an intelligent conversation with their prescribing physician.

Think back to Linda. As we worked on her diet and her nutrient depletions, her blood sugar started to normalize. Her continuous glucose monitor showed her fasting blood sugar was consistently between 85 and 90. Now, as a coach, I knew she probably didn't need as much Metformin anymore. But I didn't tell her to quit.

Instead, I said, "Linda, look at these logs. Your blood sugar is excellent. Your body is functioning so much better now. I want you to take these logs to your endocrinologist. Show them how stable your numbers are and ask them if a dosage reduction might be appropriate now that your function has improved."

Do you see the difference? You are providing the functional foundation that makes the medication less necessary. But you are letting the doctor manage the taper. This protects you, it protects the client, and it actually wins you the respect of the medical community. When a doctor sees a patient getting healthier and the coach is being professional about the medication, that doctor is much more likely to refer other patients to you.

So, let's summarize what we've covered today.

First, remember the polypharmacy threshold. Any client on five or more medications needs a safety-first approach. Their Matrix is already under chemical stress.

Second, always prioritize Drug-Induced Nutrient Depletion. Look for the "big four": Metformin, Statins, PPIs, and Diuretics. Addressing these depletions is often the fastest way to get your client feeling better.

Third, be mindful of the Cytochrome P450 system. Use your interaction checkers. Be especially careful with inhibitors like Berberine and blood thinners like Curcumin.

Fourth, know your scope. We provide the foundation; the physician manages the taper. Always encourage the client to lead the conversation with their medical team using the data you’ve helped them collect.

And fifth, move slowly. The more complex the client, the slower the Target phase should move. One new thing every week. That is how you ensure long-term success without the drama of adverse reactions.

You’re doing incredible work. Mastering this chemical web is what separates the amateurs from the true professionals. It takes patience and a bit of study, but the results for your clients will be worth every bit of effort.

Great work today. I’ll see you in the next lesson. <script>
       document.querySelectorAll('.reveal-btn, .reveal-button').forEach(button => {
         button.addEventListener('click', function() {
           const answer = this.nextElementSibling;
           if (answer && (answer.classList.contains('answer-text') || answer.classList.contains('reveal-answer'))) {
             answer.classList.toggle('show');
             answer.style.display = answer.style.display === 'none' || answer.style.display === '' ? 'block' : 'none';
           }
         });
       });
     </script>