Hi, it’s Sarah. I am so glad you’re here with me for this lesson. In our last session, we spent a lot of time establishing what I call the Clinical Hierarchy of Needs. It was all about understanding the "what." But today, we are going to take a massive leap forward. We are going to translate that theoretical hierarchy into a real-world, chronological roadmap. We’re talking about the physiological "Order of Operations."

In functional medicine, what you do matters. Of course it does. But when you do it? That is the secret sauce. That is the difference between a client having a life-changing breakthrough or suffering through a frustrating setback. For those of you transitioning into this field from another career, I want you to hear this clearly. Mastering sequencing is the absolute hallmark of a "pro" practitioner. It’s what separates the amateurs who just throw supplements at symptoms from the experts who actually move the needle on health.

When we get the sequence right, we prevent client overwhelm. we minimize those dreaded "healing crises" that make people want to quit. And perhaps most importantly, we ensure that every single dollar your client spends on supplements actually yields a result. Today, we’re moving from the "why" to the strategic execution of the R.O.O.T.S. Method.

I have a few very specific goals for us today. First, I want you to be able to defend the "Gut-First" approach. You need to be able to explain the actual physiology of supplement absorption and immune tolerance to a skeptical client. Second, we’re going to identify the clinical markers that tell you a client is truly ready to move from the "Optimize" phase—which is all about lifestyle—into the "Target" phase, where we bring in the heavy-hitting nutraceuticals.

We are also going to learn how to construct a drainage-first protocol. This is vital for preventing what I call a "metabolic backlog" during detoxification. We’ll also dive deep into the endocrine sequencing model. I’ll show you why you must prioritize the HPA and HPT axis—your adrenals and thyroid—before you ever touch sex hormone modulation. And finally, we’re going to look at some case studies together. We’ll analyze where things go wrong so you can avoid the common sequencing errors that lead to clients abandoning their protocols.

Let’s start with one of the biggest debates in our field: Gut-First versus Systemic-First. I see this pitfall so often with new practitioners. They see a client with brain fog, or joint pain, or skin issues, and they want to fix those things immediately. It’s a natural impulse. But if you attempt to treat those systemic issues while the gut is in a state of high inflammation, you are fighting a losing battle.

In the R.O.O.T.S. Method, we advocate for a Gut-First foundation in about 90% of cases. Why? Because of the physiology. If a client has intestinal permeability—what we commonly call "leaky gut"—their immune system is on high alert. When you give them a high-quality, expensive supplement to help their brain or their joints, their immune system might actually see those helpful compounds as foreign invaders. This can trigger an IgG or IgA immune response. Instead of feeling better, the client ends up with more systemic inflammation. It’s the exact opposite of what you want.

I like to use the "loading dock" analogy with my clients. Think of the gut as the loading dock of the body. If the dock is literally on fire and the workers are all on strike, it doesn't matter how many high-quality supplies you send to the building. Those supplies are never going to make it to the warehouse. In this case, the warehouse is the cells. If the loading dock is a mess, those supplements just sit there, causing more trouble, or they get tossed out entirely.

When we go Gut-First, we focus on barrier integrity. We look at microbiome balance and HCl production. This creates a stable platform for absorption. It keeps the "risk of reactivity" very low. On the other hand, if you go Systemic-First—say, by giving high-dose Vitamin D for mood without checking the gut—the risk is high. You might get poor absorption, or worse, you trigger that immune reactivity I mentioned.

Now, let’s talk about timing that transition from the Optimize phase to the Target phase. This is where a lot of practitioners lose their clients. There was a fascinating meta-analysis in 2023 that looked at functional medicine adherence. The researchers found something startling. Clients who were started on more than five supplements in their first 30 days had a 42% higher dropout rate than those who focused on lifestyle first. Think about that. Nearly half of those clients just gave up because they were overwhelmed.

We have to wait to introduce heavy targeting until the client has achieved what I call "Foundational Stability." So, how do you know when they’ve reached it? I look for three specific markers. First is a consistent circadian rhythm. Is the client sleeping at least seven hours? Do they have regular wake times? Second is blood sugar stability. Are they having fewer "hangry" episodes? Are those afternoon energy crashes starting to disappear? And third is the elimination of inflammatory triggers. Have they successfully removed highly reactive foods—usually gluten and dairy—for at least 21 days?

If they haven't checked those boxes, they aren't ready for a 12-supplement protocol. Let me tell you a story about a client named Elena to show you what I mean. Elena was 52 and struggling with classic menopausal fatigue and hot flashes. She came to me after seeing another practitioner who immediately put her on a complex "Hormone Support" pack. She was taking 12 pills a day, plus bioidentical progesterone.

But here’s the thing: Elena felt "wired but tired." She started developing acne, which she hadn't had in decades, and she quit the whole program after just two weeks. When I looked at her case, the failure was obvious. Her gut was severely dysbiotic. Because her gut wasn't healthy, she wasn't conjugating her hormones properly. This led to "estrogen dominance" symptoms, even though she was taking progesterone. Her body couldn't process what was being put into it.

We used the R.O.O.T.S. correction. We paused every single supplement. For four weeks, we did nothing but "Optimization." We focused on hydration, we worked on protein pacing, and we got her to bed by 10 p.m. every night. We supported her gut with simple bitters and a little bit of extra fiber. Once her "loading dock" was repaired, we reintroduced the targeting. The result? An 80% reduction in hot flashes with only one-third of the supplements she was taking before. That is the power of sequencing.

Next, I want to move into a topic that is often misunderstood: Sequencing Detoxification. In our world, we have to distinguish between "Drainage" and "Detoxification." They are not the same thing. Drainage is the passive flow of toxins out of the body. Detoxification is the active, biochemical conversion of toxins in the liver.

If you get the sequence wrong here, you end up with a "Herxheimer" reaction, or what people call a "healing crisis." This happens when you start mobilizing toxins in the liver, but the exit paths are blocked. It’s like trying to flush a toilet that is clogged. It’s not going to end well.

We follow a specific Drainage Hierarchy. At the very bottom—the most important part—is the colon. If a client is constipated, you should not be doing a "detox." Period. If the colon is backed up, those toxins the liver just processed will simply recirculate back into the system through something called enterohepatic circulation. It’s a vicious cycle.

After the colon, we look at the kidneys and the liver. We ensure the client is hydrated and that their bile is flowing. We might use things like dandelion or artichoke to help that bile move. Finally, we look at the lymph and the skin. This is where movement, dry brushing, or saunas come in.

Only after these "pipes" are open do we introduce Phase One and Phase Two liver support. This prevents that metabolic backlog. You want to make sure the liver can package the toxins and the colon can actually export them out of the building.

Now, let’s talk about hormones. I like to call this the "Pyramid of Power." One of the biggest mistakes I see is practitioners trying to "fix" sex hormones in isolation. But hormones function like a symphony. You cannot tune the violins if the conductor is having a heart attack. In this analogy, the sex hormones are the violins, and the HPA axis—your stress response—is the conductor.

Strategic sequencing follows a pyramid from the bottom up. At the very base, the foundation of everything, is blood sugar and insulin. This is non-negotiable. High insulin disrupts every other hormone in the human body. If you don't fix the blood sugar, you will never balance the hormones.

Level two is the Adrenals, or the HPA axis. Cortisol is our survival hormone. If cortisol is chronically high or chronically low, the body will literally "steal" resources from other systems to keep you alive. It doesn't care about your libido or your hair thickness if it thinks you're being chased by a predator.

Level three is the Thyroid. This is your metabolic thermostat. What’s amazing is that thyroid function often normalizes all on its own once you address levels one and two. And finally, at the very top, at level four, we have the sex hormones—estrogen, progesterone, and testosterone. I call these "luxury" hormones. The body will sacrifice them in a heartbeat to maintain the foundation.

If you have a client with low progesterone and high stress, you must address the stress and the adrenals first. Often, the "Progesterone Steal" resolves itself without you ever needing to reach for a hormone cream. You just had to give the body the safety it needed to start producing luxury hormones again.

Finally, I want to touch on why so many protocols fail. It usually comes down to what I call the "Kitchen Sink" error. This is when a practitioner tries to address four or five different issues at the exact same time. They’re working on the gut, the liver, the adrenals, and the thyroid all at once.

This creates an incredible amount of "biological noise." If the client has a negative reaction, you have no idea which intervention caused it. Was it the probiotic? Was it the adrenal adaptogen? You’re flying blind.

The practitioners who earn the highest fees in this industry—the ones who are truly successful—know that simplicity is the ultimate sophistication. They don't do more; they do the right things in the right order. They use strategic, sequential interventions. This leads to much higher client compliance and much clearer data for you as the coach.

Let’s wrap up with a quick summary of what we’ve covered. Remember, sequence is strategy. The order of operations determines the safety and the efficacy of your work. Always go Gut-First. Never build a house on a swamp. Ensure that barrier integrity is there before you start high-dose targeting.

Always "open the pipes" before you detox. Make sure those daily bowel movements and proper hydration are happening before you push the liver. And finally, respect the endocrine hierarchy. Stabilize that insulin and cortisol before you ever try to modulate the thyroid or sex hormones.

I want to leave you with a little bit of encouragement. Mastering this takes time. You’re going to be tempted to rush because you want your clients to feel better fast. But trust the process. Trust the R.O.O.T.S. Method. When you follow the physiological order of operations, you aren't just giving supplements—you are truly coaching the body back to health.

Great work today. I am so proud of the progress you’re making. I’ll see you in the next lesson.

<script>
  document.querySelectorAll('.reveal-btn, .reveal-button').forEach(button => {
    button.addEventListener('click', function() {
      const answer = this.nextElementSibling;
      if (answer && (answer.classList.contains('answer-text') || answer.classList.contains('reveal-answer'))) {
        answer.classList.toggle('show');
        answer.style.display = answer.style.display === 'none' || answer.style.display === '' ? 'block' : 'none';
      }
    });
  });
</script>