Hi, it’s Sarah. I am so glad you are joining me for this lesson. We are at a really pivotal point in our curriculum. In our last session, we spent a lot of time exploring the deep philosophical shift that has to happen when we move a client from crisis management toward true healthspan. It is a beautiful transition, but it is also one where many practitioners lose their way. Today, we are going to take those high-level philosophies and translate them into a concrete, personalized clinical architecture. We are moving away from those intensive, high-touch repair protocols and toward something much more sustainable: long-term maintenance.

Think of this as building the "New Normal" for your clients. As a practitioner, I know there is almost nothing more rewarding than seeing a client finally reach their goals. Maybe their energy is back, their labs look great, and they feel like themselves again. But here is the hard truth: the greatest challenge we face isn't getting them there—it’s ensuring those gains actually stick. This lesson is your blueprint for the maintenance phase. It is the bridge between our clinical intervention and a lifelong health practice. My goal is to teach you how to scale back the intensity of your protocols without sacrificing the results. We want your clients to stay resilient for decades, not just for a few months.

Before we dive into the meat of the lesson, let’s look at what we are going to accomplish together today. First, I want you to be able to identify the three primary clinical markers for transitioning a client from what we call the Target phase to the Sustain phase. We’ll also apply the Minimum Effective Dose framework, or MED, specifically to how we de-escalate nutraceuticals. We are going to design seasonal nutrition rotations that actually align with circadian biology and metabolic flexibility. I’ll show you how to structure an Annual Functional Review that monitors those sneaky subclinical biomarkers of aging. And finally, we will talk about how to implement the 80/20 Social Flexibility model. This is so important for preventing therapeutic orthorexia and making sure your clients actually have a life.

Let’s start with the transition itself. When do you actually shift a client from Target to Sustain? This is a delicate balance. If you move a client into maintenance too early, you risk a relapse of their symptoms. But if you keep them in that intensive Target phase for too long, you run into therapeutic fatigue. They get tired of the pills, tired of the restrictions, and honestly, it starts to put a real financial strain on them. In the R.O.O.T.S. Method, we are looking for what I call Clinical Stability.

I want you to look for the Stability Triad. The first pillar is Symptomatic Resolution. We are looking for at least an eighty percent improvement in their chief complaints, and that improvement needs to be sustained for at least ninety days. We don’t want a "good week"—we want a good quarter. The second pillar is Metabolic Flexibility. This is the ability to tolerate occasional deviations. If they have a meal with gluten or stay up late one night, do they have a total systemic crash? Or can they bounce back? A client who is ready for maintenance shouldn't flare up just because life happened. The third pillar is Biomarker Normalization. We want to see those key objective markers—things like HbA1c, HS-CRP, or Ferritin—move from the Red or Yellow zones into the Optimal Functional Range.

When you’re sitting with a client, don’t just ask them, "How do you feel?" I want you to start asking, "How do you recover?" That is the secret. A client in the Sustain phase should be able to recover from a stressful week or a poor meal within twenty-four to forty-eight hours. If it still takes them a full week to get their energy back after one bad night of sleep, they aren't ready for maintenance. They are still in the Target phase and they still need your intensive support.

Now, let’s talk about one of my favorite concepts: the Minimum Effective Dose, or MED. In a clinical context, the MED is the lowest dose of an intervention—whether that’s a food, a supplement, or a habit—that is required to maintain the desired clinical outcome. Think about the Target phase. We often use very high-dose therapeutic nutraceuticals. We might have someone on four grams of Omega-3s or high-potency antimicrobials to clear an overgrowth. That’s necessary for repair, but it’s not meant for forever. In the Sustain phase, our job is to systematically "peel back the layers" of the protocol.

I use something called the De-escalation Ladder. It’s a specific order of operations for reducing a protocol. In Phase One, we remove the "Kill" Protocols. This is non-negotiable. Antifungals, antimicrobials, and harsh detox binders should never be long-term maintenance items. They are too hard on the microbiome and the liver to be used indefinitely. Once those are gone and the client is stable, we move to Phase Two: Scaling the "Support" Nutrients. This is where we take those high-dose individual vitamins and try to consolidate them into a high-quality Foundation Multi or even a food-based equivalent. We want to reduce the pill burden. Finally, in Phase Three, we test "Pulse" Dosing. This is where we move from daily intake to maybe three or five days a week for items like Vitamin D or Magnesium. We do this while carefully monitoring for any return of symptoms. If the symptoms stay away, we’ve found a new, lower MED.

Let me tell you a story about a client of mine named Sarah—yes, we share a name! Sarah was fifty-two and was going through a major career transition. She had been an educator for years and was moving into a new field. When she first came to me, she was struggling with profound chronic fatigue and Hashimoto’s. We put her on a very intensive six-month Target protocol. It involved high-dose Selenium, Zinc, and a very strict Autoimmune Paleo diet, or AIP. It worked beautifully. Her energy came back, and her antibodies dropped.

But Sarah was starting to feel "trapped" by her protocol. She was afraid to eat out and tired of taking twelve different supplements every morning. So, we transitioned her to a Personalized Maintenance Protocol. We scaled her supplements down from twelve items to just four foundational ones: Magnesium, a Vitamin D and K2 combo, Omega-3s, and a gentle Thyroid Support complex. More importantly, we transitioned her diet from the strict AIP to what I call a "Mediterranean-Plus" style. We reintroduced high-quality dairy and some ancient grains. The outcome was fantastic. Her energy stayed high, her TPO antibodies remained stable, and she told me she felt "liberated." That sense of freedom actually increased her long-term compliance by forty percent because the protocol no longer felt like a prison.

This leads us right into the idea of Seasonal Nutrition and Lifestyle Rotations. One of the biggest mistakes I see practitioners make is keeping a client on a static protocol. Eating the same foods and doing the same workouts all year round actually ignores our evolutionary biology. To maintain true metabolic resilience, we have to design protocols that shift with the seasons. This prevents the body from adapting too much and hitting a plateau. It mimics the natural feast-and-famine cycles of our ancestors.

Think about it this way: seasonal rotations are like "cross-training for the metabolism." Just as an athlete changes their workouts to avoid injury and plateaus, we change our nutrition to keep our cells responsive. In the Winter, we should lean into higher fats, root vegetables, and perhaps a more ketogenic approach. It’s a time for strength training, more sleep, and using the sauna. We might even use cold thermogenesis to boost brown fat. Then, as we move into Spring, we shift. We focus on green leafy vegetables, bitter herbs, and liver support to help the body "clean house." We increase our movement and get outside for more walking. I often have my maintenance clients do a gentle three-day reset in the spring.

By the time Summer hits, the protocol changes again. We can tolerate higher carbohydrates from seasonal fruits. We focus heavily on hydration and raw foods. This is the time for high-intensity interval training and maximum sun exposure. We want that early morning sun to anchor the circadian rhythm. Then, as we move into Autumn, we transition toward squashes, fermented foods, and immune preparation. The exercise shifts toward yoga and breathwork as we start to wind down. We also make sure to optimize Vitamin D levels before the dark winter months return. This variety keeps the body's systems "on their toes" and prevents the metabolic stagnation that often leads to weight regain or energy dips.

Now, even when a client is in the Sustain phase, we can’t just set it and forget it. This is where the Annual Functional Review, or AFR, comes in. You know how in conventional medicine, the "annual physical" is usually just a quick blood draw that checks basic labs? It only flags a problem when a disease is already present. The AFR is different. It is a proactive deep dive designed to catch subclinical shifts before they ever become symptoms.

I believe every standard AFR should include four main components. First, an Inflammatory Panel. We want to look at HS-CRP and Homocysteine. These are our "early warning systems" for cardiovascular and neurological risk. Second, a Metabolic Panel. We need to check Fasting Insulin and HbA1c. We can often catch insulin resistance years before it turns into Type 2 Diabetes just by looking at these numbers. Third, we check Nutrient Status. We look at Serum Ferritin, Vitamin D, and B12 or Folate levels. And fourth, we do a Functional Assessment. I have my clients re-run the Functional Health Questionnaire so we can compare their current scores against their initial baseline from years ago.

There was a really compelling study published in the Journal of Personalized Medicine in 2022. It showed that individuals who used this kind of proactive functional monitoring had a twenty-two percent lower rate of developing chronic lifestyle-related conditions over a five-year period compared to those who just did standard annual checkups. That is a huge margin. It proves that maintenance isn't passive; it’s just less intensive.

One of the most important things I want to talk to you about today is the psychological side of maintenance. We have to balance clinical rigidity with quality of life. There is a real risk in the Sustain phase of something called Orthorexia. This is an unhealthy obsession with healthy eating. If a client is afraid to go to a wedding or afraid to travel because they might "break their protocol," then the protocol has actually become the problem. We are in the business of giving people their lives back, not taking them away.

This is why I teach the 80/20 Rule of Sustainability. We tell our clients that eighty percent of their results come from eighty percent of their choices. The "Eighty Percent" are the foundational Non-Negotiables. This might be no gluten for a Celiac client, ensuring eight hours of sleep, or daily movement. These are the anchors. But the "Twenty Percent" is the Buffer Zone. This is where social flexibility lives. This is where they can enjoy a glass of wine, have a dessert at a birthday party, or skip a workout to spend time with family. When we give them permission to be "imperfect" in that twenty percent, they are much more likely to stick to the eighty percent that actually keeps them healthy.

From a business perspective, this phase is also a great opportunity for you as a practitioner. Many of my students offer "Maintenance Memberships." This is a lower-cost, high-value monthly subscription. It might include one group Q&A session a month and that annual lab review we talked about. It provides recurring revenue for your practice and long-term security for the client. They know they aren't alone, but they don't have to pay for full-price 1-on-1 sessions every month. Typical pricing for this kind of support usually ranges from ninety-seven to one hundred and ninety-seven dollars a month. It’s a win-win.

Before we wrap up, I want to do a quick check of what we’ve covered. I want you to think about these questions. First, what is that primary indicator that a client is ready to move from Target to Sustain? Remember the Stability Triad: symptoms, metabolic flexibility, and biomarkers. Second, what does MED stand for, and why do we use it? It’s the Minimum Effective Dose, and we use it to reduce the "pill burden" and find the simplest path to health. Third, why do we bother with seasonal nutrition? Because it’s "cross-training" for the metabolism and prevents plateaus. And finally, how is that Annual Functional Review different from a regular physical? It’s proactive, not reactive. It looks for the "drifting" markers before they become "disease" markers.

I want to leave you with a thought that has really shaped my practice over the years. Your goal as a Functional Medicine coach is actually to graduate your clients. A successful maintenance protocol means they don't need you every single week. But, because you’ve built that foundation of results and education, they will trust you every year. This is how you build a referral-based practice that isn't just a revolving door of new patients, but a community of long-term success stories.

Let’s summarize the key takeaways for today. First, remember that sustainability is always the goal. Intensive protocols are for repair; flexible protocols are for life. Second, always de-escalate methodically. Remove those "kill" agents first, then scale back the supportive nutrients while you watch for any symptoms to return. Third, embrace seasonality. Shift those macros and lifestyle habits with the environment to keep the body's metabolism flexible. Fourth, monitor proactively. Use that Annual Functional Review to catch those drifting biomarkers early. And finally—and perhaps most importantly—prioritize joy. A protocol that prevents a client from participating in their life is not a sustainable protocol.

You are doing incredible work. Transitioning a client into a life of sustainable health is one of the highest forms of the coaching art. It takes patience, it takes clinical intuition, and it takes a deep respect for the client’s long-term well-being.

Great work today. I am so proud of the progress you are making in mastering these clinical architectures. Keep these principles in mind as you look at your current client roster. Is there someone who is ready to move into the Sustain phase? Is there someone who needs a more seasonal approach? Use these tools to help them find their "New Normal."

I’ll see you in the next lesson. Until then, keep practicing with heart and with science.

<script>
  document.querySelectorAll('.reveal-btn, .reveal-button').forEach(button => {
    button.addEventListener('click', function() {
      const answer = this.nextElementSibling;
      if (answer && (answer.classList.contains('answer-text') || answer.classList.contains('reveal-answer'))) {
        answer.classList.toggle('show');
        answer.style.display = answer.style.display === 'none' || answer.style.display === '' ? 'block' : 'none';
      }
    });
  });
</script>